session 2 220 which is OpenGL shading
language and we're pretty excited about
being able to have for Tiger the OpenGL
shading language available to our
developers because apples extremely
excited about the fact that we have
programmable hardware these fantastic
GPUs that we can do incredible things
with many of which you've seen
particularly this year and even starting
last year with some of our
demonstrations and also sessions on
programmability with GPUs the
interesting thing is that previously
working with these gpus has been you
know basically almost a step back to the
past in terms of the way you program
these gpus was often and sort of like
the assembly language level which isn't
approachable to a lot of developers so
what's been happening in both GPU
development that's also been driving how
these functionalities are exposed to the
developer is the evolution of higher
level shading languages that's exactly
what OpenGL shading language is and it's
an approachable way for developers
experience with languages such as C to
be able to really look at leveraging the
power of the GPU in their application
and it's also important for you to
realize that there's been some confusion
that we've had at this wwc because we've
talked about OpenGL shading language in
two contexts one is obviously in its
relationship to core image where core
image has sort of a subset of OpenGL
shading languages it supports enables
you to do all the interesting effects
that core image supports but I also want
to be clear that the purpose of this
session is to communicate about the full
OpenGL shading language which will be
part of OpenGL and tiger so that's going
to give you all the capabilities of the
language and it will expose all the
capabilities of current and future
hardware GPU hardware that supports
programmability so on that note I'd like
to actually might our speaker James
McComb the stage to take you through the
session thank you
[Applause]
morning and thanks for coming to this
session I guess that's quite a lot of
people make it back from cupertino last
night but uh thanks for coming along
yeah we're pretty excited about this the
shading language stuff that we've been
working on I guess I want to sort of
start off with looking at where we were
two years ago we came here and we
hardware with coming out that had a
programmable vertex unit and we talked
about our vertex program which was a
language to a life well reprogramming is
the vertex unit and last year we talked
about our fragment program which allows
allowed you to reprogram the sort of
fragment look up the fragment look up
and some of the visual effects that you
can do with this really are very
powerful and increasingly more and more
your games are showing up and various
things are using this becoming clear
that you can do some very powerful
real-time effect with that however those
languages were designed suddenly you
know we were handed with this this fancy
new hardware we needed to come up with a
language to program it the languages
that were created were very quite close
to the hardware they were assembly like
in nature well now we've had some time
in the OpenGL community to sit down and
discuss a way to expose that hardware
and also future hardware as new
capability appear we want a language
that can expose that be as portable as
possible in the sense of the same
program can run on various pieces of
hardware hardware supports new
operations the language will expose that
and we don't want to be revising the
language every year we want something
that we can kneeled on and there's been
a language now for a very long time
that's proven itself to be very good at
this and that's the c programming
language for the general purpose
processor see got people away from
programming and assembly all the time
and i guess the fact that we're still
programming in c today is a good sign
that it is
pretty well designed language so the
Open GL ARB got together and pretty much
took the C programming language and
added some new some flooding you sign
tax to it that that's required to I
guess make it appropriate for pre
shading so let's take a look at the
support for this if you want to if you
want to check in your application if
it's there these are the four extensions
that are going to be on an OpenGL
implementation that support this as I go
through the presentation you'll see why
you really there are four of them but
the most important one relief to check
for is the one that's highlighted there
are shading language 100 if you check
for that and that's there you should
have at least some level support for the
shading language on your implementation
hmm also a hardware support for this
really any any hardware that has support
for armed fragment program and our
vertex program that hardware can support
the OpenGL shading language or at least
varying amounts of it the shading
language being see it has looping
branching function calls and also a lot
of built-in functions like you know like
an adult for generating noise and
various things well it turns out that a
lot of current hardware will simply
doesn't have the actual machine code
instructions that will do that so there
could be programs that you'll submit
that simply won't run on the hardware at
this time however this is a
forward-thinking language and you know
as Hardware keeps coming out soon it
will be fully supported but that leads
me to my next point which is that you
know current hardware resources are
limited either in terms of the range of
instructions that are available or or in
terms of how many registers it has
therefore I'm going to talk about
software rendering now here we are at
the cutting edge of technology that
spawns a new hardware and well we're
back to software rendering again well
let's think about really why that that
is in the past opengl really has sort of
been used mainly for sort of
non-photorealistic rendering it's being
used for either previews in an
application like a CAD application it's
been use of the preview but for the
actual final rendering typically
applications have had to use their own
software renderer or in the movies
people have used render man and various
things for that well OpenGL is
developing and now with the shading
languages photorealistic rendering is is
becoming a possibility so a software
renderer becomes necessary because we
want something that is high precision
has real 32 real 32-bit float and
current graphics hardware if you take
the same thing and render it on to
vendors graphics cards and do a
comparison the colors are slightly
different the gentleman who looks ever
so slightly different you don't get the
exact same rendering so we want a
software renderer that can provide
consistent final renders and the other
thing is massive frame buffers if this
is for for the movies or even for print
of some sort you might want to have a
huge frame buffer so we want a software
renderer that can really do that and
also our new software render we wanted
to support vertex and fragment program
and it using using a runtime compiled
technology we've been working on we're
able to actually generate efficient
altivec code that will run any of these
fragment programs which is really pretty
powerful and you know it's not as fast
as hardware but this is the fallback if
you submit a shading language programs
that will not run on hardware it will
run it'll fall back to the software
renderer and it will run just not as
fast so let's uh let's have a demo here
of the software renderer in action just
to show you sort of a what we've got
here so for any of you who are here last
year you might recall this this
particular image here this is actually
just an ARB vertex and fragment
programming shader builder this isn't
even the high-level sheet
language I'm showing right now but this
is really merely just to prove approve
the point that our software renderer
here you can hear you can see the scene
being rendered this is running on a
radeon 9800 in hardware so it's
obviously you know it's pretty quick
here and if i can move the light around
like this now if we click this button
here you can see now we're running in
software this is a fragment program
running in software not yet it's
obviously slower but it's not bad so
that's an example of our software
renderer right there so let's just take
another look at another example of this
in action see here
this is another one that if there's any
medical imaging folks in the audience
they might find this somewhat
interesting it's a it's a shader that's
basically I have a 2d texture which is
just a slice of an MRI scan and one
thing that I thought would be kind of
fun to do with that is if we take a look
at the texture units here in one of the
text units I've got the slice of the MRI
scan and in another one I have a
one-dimensional texture it it pixels
wide and one tall and it's just a color
spectrum and I thought it'd be kind of
interesting to write a shader that
allows you to basically do a skill and
bias on a minimum maximum clamp on the
luminance values here and then basically
quantize it and pick out bands from the
from the spectrum so I just I guess I've
commented out some lines of this shader
code here but if I start to bring it in
you can see there it's it's it's
basically it's mapped the spectrum onto
that and that's I I'm calm at these
lines I've basically got control of
these parameters so I can do this kind
of thing and you know it's pretty quick
kind of neat but if I switch the
software renderer is just another
example of it you can see that you know
it's still it still runs pretty well so
that's just an example of our software
renderer that's in there right now so
this will become increasingly more
useful as people start to use the
shading language and as we start to get
the get the whole thing tied up so let's
just really go through what you're going
to learn today what is a shader we'll
talk about specifically what the
definition of that is we'll look at
where they fit in the OpenGL pipeline
and I'll go through some terminology
which will help as I continue through
the presentation we'll look at how
shaders are currently expressed the
current languages lots been too long on
that and then discussed it again why a
high level language is needed and then
we'll go into the language itself
get the specifics what you can expect
when you start to program this language
so first of all what is the shader well
there's a couple of things really
there's a program and this is in the
terminology of the high-level shading
language there's a program object and
inside a program object you have a
vertex shader and a fragment shader the
the intent of a vertex shader is that it
generates a transform vertex with an
untransformed vertex and opengl state as
inputs that's its goal takes vertices
have been submitted from your
application and perform some operation
to put them into wind into winter
coordinate a fragment shader eda it's
kind of similar except it's dealing with
with pixels it generates a pixel on the
frame buffer with the vertex attribute
interpolated across the scanline passed
into it and also it has access to opengl
state and obviously it can sample from
the texture unit where do they fit in
the pipeline so let's look at that you
have your vertex data coming from your
application and then you have pick em
the pixel data handed in through your
text image called or whatever and also
this cano loves he comes from
displaylist normally the vertex data
gets transport get through a fixed
function get x a model view matrix you
get transformed and it gets clipped by
the clipping plans on the sides of the
screen or even user clipping plans if
you have any and also the vertex color
get step by a very basic lighting model
that's built into opengl and then
basically you end up with a bunch of
triangles and then it goes down to the
graphics driver or the software renderer
which takes those triangles and breaks
them up into an structure p zoids for
the flat top and bottom and go through
them scanline risk online and basically
stamps these pixels into the frame
buffer and it's a very fixed operation
if you've got multi texturing turned on
it will you know pick a text or from one
text unit then another if they be module
listen to get
or something like that well the
programmability part comes in whenever
you start to pull those out and you're
going to then have the ability to
replace these two parts of the pipeline
that's what you're doing essentially so
take a look at some terminology here a
primitive is is really a series of
vertices with a connection rule so in a
sense ever if you're an immediate mode
everything between your GL begin and end
in the begin call you specify the
connection rule and everything in
between that is your is your vertices
and you can specify vertex attributes
there too shaders are applied on a
primitive basis you can't switch shader
halfway through a primitive so it's
important to note that that the shader
remains sort of constant throughout that
also opengl state it can only change on
a primitive basis you know you can only
enable or disable something outside of a
begin aunt so that's going to be the
state is going to be uniform throughout
the execution of that shader and that up
turn uniform is important because it's
actually going to be a keyword in this
in this shading language and I'm just
trying to explain where they come from
also looking at a vertex obviously it's
a 3d point comprising primitive the
vertex shaders are around once for every
vertex now in hardware they could be ran
in parallel but still is one execution
for every one of those vertices they're
independent from one another for that
for the purpose of parallelism so
therefore you cannot have communication
between subsequent executions of a
shader they're discrete from one another
also AM vertices they have attributes
associated with them you know mainly
their position the color they can have a
normal texture coordinate on a bunch of
other user-defined attributes that you
might want it weights or whatever else
you might be using and then a fragment
is really it's a pixel on your on your
frame buffer the
that comprises the scanline during the
triangle rasterization the fragment
shader determines its color and the
fragment shader has access to data
that's varying coming from the vertex
shader and its varying because for every
execution that fragment shader those
attributes are there interpolated them
across that scan line so let's take a
look at the current languages that are
available today the ARB approved
languages are vertex and fragment
program again there other said their
assembly like except they have no
bitwise operations they're all kind of
high-level instructions somewhat high
level meeting any sort of mathematical
operation they all deal in floating
point and it's a sim d instruction set
and add is going to do an add-on for
components in a register all the
registers or four component float and
also the instructions are a fairly close
mapping of the hardware instructions
which is actually the very thing that we
are trying to get away from nye and the
language has enforced resource
limitations which can be annoying but
the upside of that the good side of
enforced resource limitations is that
you have a clear you know if it's going
to run on hardware or not you know that
you can query it and as long as your
program is within those well-defined
bonds it will run on the graphics
hardware this is just a look at the the
instruction set that was available I
broke it into four sections this is a
the ARB fragment program instruction set
you can see you know assembly like names
this is an example of an ARB vertex
program a very simple one that merely
transforms the vertex and moves a
texture coordinate through pretty
straightforward and this is a fragment
program that basically samples at
samples of texel from texture unit 0 on
texture unit 1 and then it multiplies
them together and writes it to the
output fragment that's what those
languages look like this point pretty
straightforward but it can get pretty
complicated if you want to express large
programs and the complex effect
so let's take a look at the high level
shading language at this point why do
you want to use this potentially left
code to write you can express it in
terms that you're more familiar with I'm
sure some of you are familiar with
writing assembly code but you know no
matter wat you're really only writing at
your inner loops you're not writing it
every day with your code so being able
to write and see it could be convenient
you no longer need to deal with specific
registers anymore that's all virtualized
just declare variables and use them as
you please you can depend on the
compiler to some extent to take care of
that for you also is a the goal of
Hardware independence this language
doesn't tie itself to any one piece of
hardware which i think is I think is a
good thing in the long run and also is a
nice the nice intent of being able to
have code reuse the ability to have
function calls and also to be able to
draw in multiple files comprising one
shader is very useful you could have
like a files like I got a library almost
full of like useful chunks of or
code the ears and you can function call
into that from the shading language so
that code reuse is pretty nice here's
just a comparison of sort of what the
two things look like side by side you
can see there's the the ARB vertex
program that transforms a vertex and
passes its color through and then you
can see the GL shading language a
version of the same thing it's a more
natural form of expressing it really
look it just looks like see really has a
main entry point and so forth so the the
object model here the way the against
the API kind of works is to make a
vertex shader object you basically need
a about you can have one or more strings
which are the strings of the C code that
you basically want to put in there can
be more than one of these strings and
they're concatenated together and you
can function call in between them you
need a vertex shader object and then
also it's the exact same thing except
for the fry
and shader when you have these two these
two objects created you you basically
pass each of those through a compile
stage which compiles it onto the machine
code which then gets passed into a
linker which is a interesting regardless
these things now with four shaders but
it goes into a linker and then it builds
a final program object and that is what
you then you use that program object and
start drawing primitives and that the
shader will be applied to those the
language is he inspired it's got the
usual main entry point the language
supports looping and branching and all
those other things just like you'd
expect there are no pointers since uh
since really you're not you're not
accessing memory directly there's no
real concept of accessing memory in this
the idea of having pointers doesn't
really make sense in this language so
that sign tax you will not see there are
new data types since the hardware
registers are all up our vectors there
are new data types to support that and
also there's a matrix data type as well
since we're introducing vector data
types what happens if you want to pick a
scalar out of that you want to get
access to a scalar or you want to
reorder the scalar components in a
vector well there's use new sign
textures through the length I we can
pick out a certain component or reorder
them there are new qualifiers you know
you've got the see program for a vertex
shader and then you can see program for
a fragment shader they're separate how
do you get communication in between them
well the way that's done is via
declaring a variable with a particular
qualifier in both programs and having
the names match that's what the linker
stage does is it ties up those loose
ends and then we have there are a bunch
of intrinsic variable just pre defined
variables that are there and either they
they allow you to access OpenGL state or
you write your value
into these predefined variables so let's
take a look at the the qualifiers the
type qualifiers that exist the first
stage is the attribute inside your
vertex shader to access the vertex
attribute you basically just declare
something with the attribute qualifier
they only make sense to be declared in a
vertex shader and attributes they change
at most once per vertex and there we
don't like can't write to them think
variables are declared with the uniform
qualifier basically those are things
that are set outside the shader and
their uniform throughout the execution
of that shader so they're read-only and
they're frequently frequency of changes
that most once for primitive things like
the OpenGL state and even in fragment
program that even texture the texture
data is considered uniform as well the
other thing just like see you've also
got comped which is just in line
constants you want to declare in your
program obviously read only if you don't
put a qualifier in your just declaring
really a temporary variable just for
scratch the space it's important to note
like I said earlier the data in those
will not persist between executions of
the shader you can't write something in
to attempt unexpected to be there on the
deck we process of the next vertex I
wasn't going to happen they are
readwrite access and then there's a
qualifier varying basically variables
declared with the varying types are
basically your your pipeline of
communication between the vertex shader
and the fragment shader declare
something is varying the rasterizer is
going to take that value from the vertex
shader it's going to interpolate it and
the fragment program will get that value
as its interpolated across the scan line
so
let's take a look at some of these new
data types you basically have three main
classes of data type you have
floating-point types there's an integer
type and there's even a boolean type now
you can't expect that that integer is
actually going to be stored in a fixed
res register so there's still no like
like shifting or bitwise operations but
the type still exists because some of
the functions expect it to be there also
it can these are the vector types and it
can be two component three component and
four component vectors and again use
Swizzle and picard scalar components
also they can be accessed as a
zero-based array so if you have a vector
and you want the second scalar you cadet
you could do you know variable open the
square bracket and actually pick it out
like that so it's a two-way successive
obviously that there are scalar types
now if you declare something as a float
it's just going to have one once killer
in there and of course the flow control
constructs in this language they will
only accept a boolean type 2 to brunch
on there's also a bunch of matrix types
you'll probably want to use these for
getting the transformation matrix from
OpenGL store stuff in there or you might
have your own matrices within your
application that you want to pass in as
parameters stored column major which is
compatible with the way the rest of
OpenGL works and again you can access
these as an array of column vectors if
you take a matrix I guess take it take
the first element of that that will
return a vector type and then with that
vector you could access the first
element get a scalar that's a title work
the last data type is a sampler
basically it's a handle to encapsulate a
texture unit there are function calls in
this language for getting out at exel
from a texture unit and a sampler you
need to pass that into the first
argument and then outside of the shader
in
our application you then sort of you
attach a texture unit to a sampler
that's how they work it's just a handle
and again they're always declared with a
uniform qualifier because texture units
don't change between executions of the
shader hour during execution of the
shader data from these is of course
read-only so here is another sort of
deviation from the C programming
language because we know I have I get
aggregate data types in a sense
basically things that are non scalar we
need these constructors not so much
constructors in the c++ sense with the
score even perhaps similar an idea
anyhow they're used to initialize an
aggregate type and of course in c you
had this concert you could just do you
know declare a variable V equals and
then you could open the braces and fill
in each of the components what a
constructor is is basically when you
declare a variable if you want to assign
something if you want to put something
into it you basically make a function
call which is the same as the type as
the name of the type and then in those
brackets you fill in the values that's
how it works so I've shown you a couple
of examples of that you can see there
I'm declaring a four component vector
type I then have to call a function vac
for with for scalars inside of that to
fill it in and then you can see the
similar example filling in the actual
structure you make a call which is the
same name as the structure and you pass
in the values and you can see how they
actually they net you can these
constructors nest that's one thing
that's a little different that you'll
need to get used to but it's really it's
not hard to figure out in terms of the
operators you have there's really
there's nothing really new here the only
thing that you'll see missing is the
bitwise operations there's a logical and
an or and so forth but not a bitwise so
Quisling just to give an example of how
that works you can see here I declare
v-0 and construct it with us with for
scalars
and you can see then but but I'm
assigning v02 v1 but v-0 has a Swizzle
art and you can see what that's actually
doing is actually reordered the the
components within the steelers within
that these swizzles they can either be X
Y Z W they have connections if
convenient names XYZ w you'd probably
use if you're if it's positional data
rgba if its color space data and there's
even an s TR q if it's used for storing
texture units you can use them
interchangeably but to make your code
more readable you might want to take
advantage of that also as a result of a
Swizzle you can actually change the data
type you can see that when I'm assigning
a V 0 2 V 3 V 3 is only effect two so it
has only two components you're going to
need to pick the two components that
you're going to assign to that which is
why i'm picking q and ass and also you
can see that type conversion can be used
used to just for just one single scalar
in terms of the the operators the in a
sense they're they're overloaded in the
sense of depending on the type of their
working with they'll have us they'll
have a different behavior no it's not
don't get too scared of that it's pretty
simple the behavior actually for all the
operations apart from the multiply the
behavior is very obvious it simply
applies if you do an add a equals B plus
C it's going to perform that ad for all
the scalars within that the vector it's
going to do for ads if the matrix it's
going to do 16 of them the reason the
reason multiply is a little different is
that if you multiply a vector times the
matrix it does a linear algebraic
multiply where it's actually going to be
for dot product that's what it's
actually going to break down into which
is really convenient because at the
beginning your vertex programs you're
always having to do these for dot
products to transform your vertex will
not just a one liner it's just you know
position equals vertex times modelview
matrix it's pretty convenient and me at
six times matrix is also it works that
way
so I talked about the predefined
variable you can see that a we have a
predefined ones one for the the vertex
color normal and access to the texture
units to communicate varying types to
communicate from vertex to fragment is
it again texture coordinates in the
front color and outputs from the
fragment shader when you're right you
write your final color into GL frag
color and that's what will get written
to the frame buffer and then there's a
bunch of uniforms are declared in your
modelview matrix and access to the bill
lighting information from the Geo state
so let's take a look at a we've talked a
little about the language here let's
look at how to I've shown you the
program string how do you actually load
these into your GL and actually make use
of them in your application well the
first thing you want to do is a acquire
the program strength load them from a
file do whatever you need to do but uh
load them into two two strings we've got
a type declared for that GL char our
pointer load them in and then you want
to actually put them in an array of
strings and the reason for that is what
I said you can actually have multiple
strings that comprise a shader with
function calls between them so in this
case I just have one string so I'm
obviously fitting the array size to be
just one but that could be any number
the second step you need to Claire three
handles one for the vertex shader object
one for the fragment shader object and
then one for the final program object
that these are both going to be attached
to so you either have those declared and
then other two variables are useful is
basically a status status variable and
also the length of a log because when
you perform compiles and links you're
actually going to get information back
from the compiler that you might want to
check or if those errors you're going to
want to see them so yes there's aisle is
not a log of it comes by
your next stage let's create the vertex
shader object you can see from the the
code I've got here how to do it it's not
very hard you basically create shader
object on you tell you know it's a
vertex shader GL shader source ARB
allows me basically to attach the string
to that compile shader r will actually
perform the kit will start the compiler
going generating the machine code for
this and at that point you want to get
back the status of the compile to see if
it succeeded or not and also you want to
get back the length of an info log and
you need that length because you'll need
to need to allocate some memory to store
your login too hmm so you will repeat
that step for the fragment shader it's
exactly the same thing except with
vertex pretty much replaced with the
word fragment so you're going to end up
with these vertex and fragment shader
objects at that point you create a
program object you attach the vertex and
fragment shader to that and then you
call link program and that's basically
going to tie up varying date varying
variables that you declared in the
vertex and fragment shader it doesn't
name match on those and connects them
together and the linker you also need to
check for errors as well because the
link stage like like the C programming
can feel I need to check that so
assuming that that all succeeded and you
have your program object ready to go if
you're ready to start drawing geometry
with that program object you make a call
to use program object and then you just
put it in there and it will start to
draw with that very unlike our vertex
and fragment program there's no GL
enable/disable you don't enable and
disable it rather you use a program
object and then if you want to turn off
the shader you call it with no not well
to that will switch you back to the
fixed function pipeline so I mentioned
that it inside these languages you can
declare variables with the uniform type
basically are your way of passing
parameters into your program for those
familiar with our vertex and fragment
program these environment parameters and
local parameters well they're all
environment parameters at this point and
this is how you set them you basically
you should just two calls required the
first one is you need to get like an
index back which is the position of that
uniform and you do the first thing you
pass in is the actual string that you
declared in your program it gives you an
index packet then you make call to GL
uniform and there's several variants of
that for you know passing in an array or
some immediate inline floating point
values the pass in your uniform data the
same thing is true for vertex attributes
you basically get the name you get an
index from the name of the attribute and
you set the values to take a look up
there are a bunch of built-in functions
that you're really nice there's a kind
of a library of functions that come
along with this I would encourage you to
if you're interested in this in this
language to go and get the the official
the orange book on the shader language
because the range of these functions is
too much really for me to go through
today but you should look through them
because there are a lot of very
interesting ones some of the ones that
I've been finding quite interesting as a
noise generation functions which are
really good for image processing
basically random number generators but
there's a there's a lot of variations in
them there's other things like you know
like a like a mix function for doing a
linear interpolation between two values
which is convenient and also the the
texture access functions naturally I
want to take a look at those because
those I said bubs I think I feel are
probably the most important one thing
that's really pretty nice about this
language is we've always thought of
texture access being available in
fragment programs because all
you want to text your map your surface
well the shooting language allows you to
do texture sampling in vertex programs
as well this has some pretty powerful
side effects you can imagine passing
just a bunch of vertices into OpenGL and
in the vertex program displacing them
based on a texture map suddenly you know
you could have a live video stream going
into your GL have a bunch of vertices
and have like you know like there's
three eyes like a 3d fifth almost
showing up there's a lot of a lot of
possibilities there or you could even
just store the generic vertex data in
your texture units it's kind of kind of
mind-bending but the things you can do
there are large in terms of of texture
access basically it's just a function
call and you pass in a texture
coordinate masama and basically it gives
you back a four-component value which is
the RGB a value at that point the really
the functionality here is the same as
ARB fragment program I got obviously
with the addition that you can do it in
the vertex program it does add support
for depth textures where it can get at
exelon automount do a comparison against
a depth buffer which is useful for
shadowing effect so now I actually I
would like to switch over to show you a
bit of a demonstration here no it's
important to note that this is really
the bleeding edge here so it's not done
yet but I want to give you an example of
sort of to show you how far along we are
with this so hopefully things will go
according to plan here hmm so I went
ahead and did a little work here to get
this integrated into shader builder so
that I could show you what we have I
should let me let me first show you just
typing this in I'm going to make the
font here a little bigger so that you
can
see a little more clearly okay so let's
go to the fragment program here on write
a simple one just declaring my main
function right here and then basically
in my fragment program I'm merely going
to pass through the interpolated color
data coming from the vertex shader to
the output so this is the predefined
variable geo frag color and you can see
as I'm typing here again as is common
and shader builder it'll do the real
time sign text checking and even though
there's a see it can we r still able to
do that which is kind of nice so that's
the fragment shader done that's a very
simple one and then in the vertex shader
let's pick OpenGL shading language oh
dear let's uh let's try that again let
me just show you what I've got here are
they as I said this is a very recent
code here you can see the high-level
shading language being used to express a
pretty simple lighting model it's just
done in the vertex program the vertex
shader space the fragment shader is
merely passing through the color let me
make the code make the code a little
bigger hopefully everyone's able to see
that ok but you can see the kind of
stuff we're doing this is common and see
you know being able to nass brackets and
so forth so basically you can express
these things and a lot less lines of
code if I want you can see on this line
i declare f1 and here i use it again
well i can go ahead and like move it
inside
deletes outline hood we're getting there
we're not done yet but this is this
feature is slated for for tiger but we
really want to get it to you as fast as
we can so we're doing our best difficult
specs to implement so we'll we'll keep
you posted on that so I guess I want to
wrap up at this point I hope you enjoyed
hearing about this at least and I hope
that when it becomes available you'll
start to use it and yeah I guess at this
point I'd like to invite travis up if
I'm sure there'll be a lot of question